CUBANS SEND ANNIVERSARY MESSAGE TO USSR

Havana PRENSA LATINA in Spanish to Latin America 0253 GMT 2 November
1962--E (OFFICIAL USE ONLY)

(Text) Havana--President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado and Premier Fidel Castro
Ruz sent a message to Leonid Brezhnev, president of the Supreme Soviet
Presidium of the Soviet Union, and Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev of that
country on the 45th anniversary of the October Revolution. The message
said: In the name of the Cuban people, the revolutionary government, and
ourselves, we salute the people and the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics on the 45th anniversary of the glorious October
Revolution. In defeating the capitalist social order, defeating the
imperialist invaders, and establishing the first proleteriat state, the
Russian working class and the Communist Party, under the genial direction
of Lenin, uprooted the exploitation of may by man and established the basis
for a classless society, opening a new era in human history characterized
by the formation of the world socialist system and the acceleration of the
decaying process of imperialist capitalism.

Stimulated by the example of the Soviet people who, after conquering their
enemies with exemplary courage, are completing the building of a socialist
society in order to start the construction of a communist society, the
working class, the people, and the Revolutionary Government of Cuba--on a
war footing to fight in defense of self-determination, independence,
sovereignty, and dignity of the homeland, attacked by U.S.
imperialism--renew, on this historic anniversary, their faith in the
principles of Marxism-Leninism, their decision to build a socialist
society, and their loyalty to proletarian internationalism, raising as a
banner the five points which guarantee our people the peace and dignity
which will halt an increase in the threat of thermonuclear war, which is
still at hand. The Cuban people and revolutionary government wish for
unbreakable Cuban-Soviet friendship and for the happiness and progress of
the Soviet people. Fidel Castro Ruz, Premier of the Revolutionary
Government and Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado, President of the Republic.
