FIDEL SPEAKS AT LENIN CENTENNIAL CEREMONY

Summary of Events

[Editorial Report--F] Havana Domestic Television and Radio Services in
Spanish at 0126 GMT on 23 April 1970 begins a live relay of the Lenin birth
centennial ceremony the Charlie Chaplin Theater in Havana.

Arnold Kalinin, charge d'affaires of the Soviet Embassy, begins speaking in
fluent Spanish at 0252 GMT. He notes the worldwide commemoration of the
Lenin birth centennial and goes on to mention that a Cuban delegation is in
the Soviet Union headed by Maj Raul Castro to mark the centennial. Kalinin
quotes Fidel Castro in praise of Lenin and discusses Lenin's principles,
the world socialist system, and internationalist friendship. He speaks of
the objective of working for the triumph of socialism and wishes the Cuban
people and Fidel Castro the greatest success in the construction of
socialism. He concludes his remarks at 0310 GMT.

The next speaker is Soviet cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov, in Russian with
simultaneous translation to Spanish, beginning at 0311 GMT. He voices
gratitude for the invitation to come to Cuba and take part in the Lenin
birth centennial events Shatalov goes on to discuss the construction of
socialism in Cuba under Fidel Castro and conveys the Soviet people's
greetings to the Cuban people. The cosmonaut says that part of his heart
belongs to Cuba because he has always admired it. He notes how close Cuba
is to the United States when seen from a space ship, declares that U.S.
imperialism is trying to isolate Cuba, and he recalls the blow given
imperialism at Giron. He says that Cuba has the full support of the Soviet
people. Long live Marxism-Leninism! Long live Cuban-Soviet friendship! he
concludes. His speech ends at 0332 GMT.
