CASTRO LAUDS CHILE'S STRUGGLE IN SPEECH HONORING ALLENDE

Moscow Domestic Service in Russian 1445 GMT 14 Dec 72 L

[Text] A grandoise meeting of Cuban-Chilean friendship has taken place in
(?Fraternity) Square in Havana.

Hundreds of thousands of Cubans expressed their resolute support for the
Chilean Government and people. The first secretary of the Cuban Communist
Party Central Committee, Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government
Fidel Castro, speaking at the meeting, welcomed Chilean President Salvador
Allende, who is in the country on an official visit. Under the leadership
of the Popular Unity government, Fidel Castro pointed out, the Chilean
working class and peasants are firmly proceeding on the path of deep
socioeconomic transformations. Castro resolutely condemned the economic
aggression by the monopolies and the intrigues of international reaction
against Chile. Imperialists are using increasingly refined methods to break
the Chilean people.

However, the balance of power in Latin American has changed, Castro
stressed. Cuba, Peru, Panama, and other countries now exist which do not
agree with Washington's diktat and which are defending their sovereignty.

Touching on Cuban-American relations, Castro declared that Cuba would not
hold talks with the United States until it ends its blockage policy.

In conclusion, Fidel Castro called for strengthening solidarity with the
fraternal people of Chile.

Speaking at the meeting Chilean President Salvador Allende warmly thanked
the Cuban party, government, and people for giving him a great honor, the
award of the National Order of Jose Marti. He declared that the Chilean
people are implementing great revolutionary transformation, opening the way
toward the construction of socialism. We are along, Salvador Allende
stressed, for we have on our side the solidarity of the people of Latin
America and the generous aid and solidarity of the socialist community.
