KISSINGER REACTIONARY BUT A REALIST, SAYS CASTRO

Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in Portuguese 2 Mar 74 p 11 X

[Text] Havana--Fidel Castro declared yesterday that U.S. Secretary of State
Henry Kissinger "is a politician with reactionary ideas, but also a
realistic man of whom it cannot be said that he advocates war." He added
that he only knows him partially because he has not read all his books, but
he accepts the analogy between Kissinger and Chancellor Metternich of the
Austrian empire.

"Like Metternich, Kissinger is a minister of foreign relations of an empire
whose policy is based on the survival of the empire because he knows that
it is in a crisis. Kissinger is an intelligent man who tries to adapt the
foreign policy of the United States to the reality of today with the
primary objective of preserving the Yankee empire as long as possible."

Cordially and with good humor answering all the questions asked during a
long press interview after a ceremony honoring the Cuban Government held by
the Argentine economic mission which arrived in Cuba on Monday, Castro made
a long analysis of trade between Havana and Buenos Aires, declaring that
this is "a great breach in the blockage imposed by the North Americans.
This not only has great political importance, because it was a rejection by
Argentina of the policy of the United States, but it also is the most
significant trade which we carry out with a country with a state of
development similar to ours." Commenting on the position to be taken by
Washington with respect to the sale to Cuba of products of U.S. companies
located in Argentina, Fidel Castro said that to deny that permission "would
be a very serious, very grade challenge to Argentine sovereignty."
