Fidel Presides Over Inauguration

FL021735Y Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1045 GMT 2 Jul 77 FL

[Text] Our commander in chief, Fidel Castro, party first secretary and
president of the Council of State, attended the inauguration of the Juan
Marinello printing plant in Guantanamo Province.  The plant's production
capacity is as high as 22 million books and 1 million magazines a year.

Along with Fidel, the following persons attended the ceremony:  Juan
Almeida Bosque, Armando Hart Davalos, and Arnaldo Milian Castro, all
members of the PCC Politburo; government ministers; Hans-Walter Gerlach,
deputy minister of the GDR Construction of Machine Tools and Processing
Machinery Ministry; and leaders of the Guantanamo Province.

During the tour of the modern Juan Marinello printing plant installation,
our Commander in Chief Fidel Castro talked with the workers of different
departments, and in a copy of the first book printed by the plant he wrote:
As a rememberance to the promising and enthusiastic youth who work in this
beautiful and modern printing plant of Guantanamo:  As the result of your
efforts, our new generations will be educated.  I congratulate you.

In reply to a question by a reporter of the GDR television network, our
commander in chief emphasized the importance of the plant for Guantanamo
Province, the efficient training of the Cuban technicians in the GDR, and
the magnificent relations existing between our two peoples.

Hans-Walter Gerlach, GDR deputy minister, and Rolando Rodriguez, deputy
minister of culture, spoke during the ceremony.  Gerlach said that the
inauguration was a symbol of the efforts of the Cuban and GDR workers and a
symbol of proletarian internationalism.  Rolando Rodriguez, after recalling
the history of literature and the publishing industry in our country,
announced that by decision of the party and government the Guantanamo
printing plant would be given the name of Juan Marinello, a man of profound
humanity, a revolutionary intellectual and pride of our literature.
