VARIOUS REPORTS ON INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES

Iran-Iraq Resolution Attempt

Havana GRANMA in Spanish 29 Oct 80 p 1

[Message from Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro, president of the Movement of
Non-alined Countries, to the chiefs of state or government of those
countries involved in the conflict between Iraq and Iran, sent from Havana
on 26 October 1980, the year of the Second Congress]

[Text]  Excellency:

I address you concerning the conflict that opposes two nonalined countries,
Iraq and Iran, a sad event for all the chiefs of state of the movement and
a dangerous source of confrontation that attacks the very interests of
peace and international security and the economic and social development of
our peoples.

As soon as we received the first news of the outhreak of hostilities, we
instructed the Cuban minister of foreign relations, Comrade Isidoro
Malmierca, to contact both parties with the objective of contributing to
the finding of a peaceful, political and honorable solution to the
conflict.

Comrade Malmierca has visited Baghdad and Tehran on two occasions,
conferring with Presidents Saddam Hussein and Abol Hasan Bani-Sadr and in
this way, through the presence of a representative of the movement in the
area, contributing our modest and binding effort to try to put an end to
the conflict on a basis acceptable to the two countries.

The results of the discussions engaged in by Minister Malmierca have
demonstrated to us the utility of continuing to negotiate with both
governments.

We are firmly convinced that a solution to the war that today pits these
two sister nations against one another must and can be found if we start
with strict respect for the rules of international law, the principles
governing peaceful relations between nations that can be found summarized
in the successive declarations made by the summit conferences of our
movement and most especially in the declaration made by the Sixth
Conference of Chiefs of State or Government.

This is why we have sent Minister Malmierca to inform the Coordinating
Bureau in New York and then he will again go the Baghdad and Tehran with
personal messages for Presidents Saddam Hussein and Abol Bani-Sadr in the
hope of being able to inform you as soon as possible as to any progress
achieved.

I take advantage of this occasion to reiterate to you my most sincere
respects,

Fidel Castro
President of the Movement of Nonalined
Countries
