FIDEL CASTRO INAUGURATES HOLGUIN FACTORY

FL272200 [Editorial Report] Havana Domestic Television Service in Spanish
at 2004 GMT, joined by Havana Domestic Service in Spanish at 2200 GMT, on
27 July covers the factory inauguration in Holguin at which Fidel Castro
delivers the closing remarks. The documentary showing how the factory was
built with Bulgarian assistance ends at 2020 GMT. Staff announcer Manolo
Ortega interviews workers and Bulgarian technicians in the crowd for some
13 minutes. Two more documentaries are show, one on life in Holguin
Province and another showing further views of the new factory.

At 2055 GMT, Fidel Castro is seen approaching the speaker's stand.

The ceremony begins at 2059 GMT with the national anthems of Cuba and
Bulgaria. Castro, Bulgarian CP Politburo member Peko Takov and Nicaraguan
Sandinist Commanders Humberto Ortega and Victor Tirado, as well as First
Party Secretary in Holguin Miguel Cano Blanco are introduced to the crowd.
The first speaker is Jose Angel Ramirez, who reads a message from the Cuban
construction workers involved in building the factory. He is followed by
(Ivan Nepko Grigorov) who speaks in the name of the Bulgarian workers.
Castro then presents certificates of recognition to Cuban and Bulgarian
workers. The Cuban workers present Castro with a photograph of Cuban
independence war hero Calixto Garcia and a wood painting to Peko Takov for
Todor Zhivkov.

Peko Takov takes the stand at 2119 GMT. He concludes at 2157 and is
embraced by Castro. Takov then presents a bust of Giorgi Dimitrov to the
factory.

Fidel Castro begins his speech at 2200 GMT and ends at 2259 GMT, having
spoken for 59 minutes, and the coverage ends with the singing of the
Socialist Internationale.
