Castro on Cienfuegos Manpower

FL252319 Havana Radio Reloj Network in Spanish 2138 GMT 25 Dec 86

[Text] The fact that the utilization of the workday has improved from 67 to
78 percent at the Cienfuegos electronuclear plant in the equivalent of
having an additional 1,000 workers on the project, Fidel has stated. During
his participation in the National Assembly of the People's Government
(ANPP), the commander in chief said that despite the characteristics of the
project, which requires a large number of controls, if the figure were to
go up to 85 percent, that would be the equivalent of 2,000 workers more.
Fidel noted that the brigade building the plant will have to build the
electronuclear plant in northern Oriente. In order for the brigade to have
the manpower needed, a program to build houses for the workers is
necessary. If one thinks of long-term stability, the commander in chief
added, we have to begin building housing not only in Cienfuegos but also in
northern Oriente and in Pinar del Rio.

The basic problem faced by the brigade building the Cienfuegos
electronuclear plant is the welders, because the welding work there must be
of high quality and precision, Fidel asserted. He said that a school has
been built where 400 students are learning to weld. It could be that in the
future we might be able to help other countries that do not have enough
welders, but for the time being we must recruit more, Fidel declared. He
mentioned the political work among 90 skilled welders who came to
Cienfuegos from other provinces for 2 years, and noted that 88 of them have
stated their intention to continue indefinitely in the construction of
electronuclear plants. The commander in chief told the 457 ANPP delegates
that party work and construction in Cienfuegos are truly praiseworthy.
