Castro Surveys Economic Plans

FL171304 Havana Radio Progreso Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 17 Jan 87

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of the party
Central Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers, has
attended the national meeting of the planning front [reunion nacional del
frente de proyectos] in the Palace of Conventions where we held an
extensive dialogue of several hours with the delegates and guests attending
the meeting.

The meeting was the conclusion to the assembly process carried out by the
27 enterprises specializing in investment programs throughout the country.
In the review, more than 1,000 statements and suggestions were made on
technical-economic efficiency and general aspects related to the control
and quality of this important sphere.

During one of his speeches, Fidel said that we should not think the current
process of rectifying errors will impede new investments. On the contrary,
it will allow us to save billions of pesos by improving economic efficiency
and use of the work day.

Our highest leader said the new perspective will allow us to confront
high-priority projects, especially in the water sector and the hospital
network. He also referred to the need to guarantee better utilization of
professionals in these areas.

Fidel stressed that excess specialization prevents the correct formation of
professionals and, because of this, it would be necessary to revise the
programs of universities and higher-education centers.

Taking into account the current importance of computerization, he said it
is indispensable to deepen the study of that novelty to increase the
productivity and efficiency of new projects.

The head of the Cuban revolution reflected on how linking [vinculacion]
influences the productivity of the intellectual worker and he stressed that
things have to be done with revolutionary awareness, which is the true
method of creating socialism.
