Castro Continues Visit; Activities in Quito

Meets With Sanguinetti, Barco

FL1208194488 Havana Television Cubana Network in Spanish 0000 GMT 12 Aug 88

[Report by Pedro Martinez Pirez from Quito, Ecuador]

[Excerpt]  [Passage omitted]  The first activity of President Fidel Castro
on 11 August in Quito, capital of Ecuador, was a meeting at this Colon Hote
with Uruguayan President Jose Maria Sanguinetti.

[Begin recording]  [Castro]  It was a very pleasant meeting.  We spent a
very good hour together; many and varied topics were discussed; bilateral
relations, the Central American situation, the general situation, and
economic problems.  It was a very good and pleasant exchange.  I feel it
was the same for him.  You can always get so much when contact is direct
and you can listen to views.  The president received us with great
hospitality and warmth.

[Unidentified reporter]  What was the topic, Comrade?

[Castro]  I already told you the topic.  We discussed the problems...

[Reporter, interrupting]  Anything in particular?

[Castro]  No, nothing in particular.  We discussed everything in general.
[Indistinct crosstalk]

[Martinez Pirez]  Mr. President, Cuban television is interested in your
opinion.

[Sanguinetti]  Well, we have had a very interesting exchange of views.  As
President Castro said, it was very pleasant and open.  I would say, above
all, that it was very open.  We have discussed the whole gamut of Latin
American issues, all the areas of conflict, the prospects, the
possibilities.  Without a doubt, I believe all of this is very positive and
constructive, the fact that a dialogue in Latin America can go beyond the
differences in systems.

[Martinez Pirez]  Would you say that Latin America unity emerges stronger
following these festivities?

[Sanguinetti]  All these festivities have been festivities of Latin
American unity.

[Martinez Pirez]  Thank you very much.  [end recording]

Also at the Colon Hotel shortly after his meeting with Sanguinetti, Fidel
Castro met with Colombian President Virgilio Barco.  [Begin Castro
recording]  We have talked about problems [words indistinct].  They are
very important, common Latin American interests, problems that give rise to
other problems.  That's what we have discussed, not effects but causes.
[end recording]  [passage omitted]
