Castro Greets Doctors Returning From Armenia

FL1912225088 Havana Television Service in Spanish 0100 GMT 19 Dec 88

[Excerpts] Our Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of the PCC
Central Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers,
received at the airport today the Cuban medial brigade that provided help
to the Armenian people affected by the earthquake.

[Begin recording] [Announcer] The commander in chief greeted each member of
the delegation headed by Health Vice Minister Abelardo Ramierz and Julian
Alvarez, member of the PCC Central Committee and chief of its Health
Department.  Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Yuriy Petrov and Public Health
Minister Julio Teja accompanied Fidel.  Responding to questions posed by
Fidel, doctors and nurses explained that Soviet authorities are taking
measures in these areas to prevent epidemics and begin rebuilding.  They
also referred to the affectionate way in which the Armenian people received
them.  Despite their pain, they expressed their gratitude to Cuba and
Fidel.

[Castro] Apparently there were many doctors there, many Soviet doctors.
[Passage omitted] Could it be that the Soviets were afraid that you would
get sick there and they sent you back because of the cold weather?

[Speakers] [Indistinct passage]

[Castro] Why did you come back so soon?

[Speaker] Commander, apparently it was because of a decision made by the
government.  Apparently an epidemiological measure is going to be
implemented in the city.  I believe it was not a matter of thinking we were
[words indistinct].  They are taking epidemiological measures because the
bodies have been under the rubble and snow for too long, for too many days.
they do not expect to find anyone alive anymore.

[Castro] Are you happy?

[Speakers] Very happy.

[Castro] You did everything you could.  [Words indistinct] the necessary
time.  Unquestionably they have mobilized thousands of doctors.  [passage
omitted] [end recording]
