Castro Rejects Pressure To Withdraw From Angola

MB0306155188 Johannesburg International Service in English 1500 GMT 3 Jun 88

[Text] President Fidel Castro of Cuba has made it clear that his government
is committed to an independent policy an Angola and is not amenable to
pressure from any source.  Dr. Castro was addressing a closed meeting of
the Nonaligned Movement in Havana, which focused mainly on the recent peace
discussions in Angola [as heard] involving South Africa, Cuba, and the
Angolan Government.

When asked what Cuba would do if the Soviet Union put pressure on Cuba to
withdraw its forces from Angola, Dr. Castro described the question as
hypothetical, saying the Soviet Union knew that Cuba would not submit to
such pressure.

The Cuban leader's remarks were reported by a senior Cuban Government
journalist in a telephone interview with the Spanish service of Radio RSA.
The journalist said there had been a slight shift in Cuba's position on the
troop withdrawal from Angola that became apparent at the nonaligned
meeting.  Previously, he said, Cuba had insisted on four conditions for
such a withdrawal.  These were:  first, the implementation of UN Resolution
435 on independence for South-West Africa/Namibia; second, the total
withdrawal of South African troops from Angola; third, an end to South
African support for the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola
[UNITA]; and last, a halt to American aid to UNITA.

Dr. Castro told the meeting that Cuba now only insisted on the first three
conditions.  American support for UNITA, he said, was not Cuba's concern;
it was a matter between the United States and the Popular Movement for the
Liberation of Angola government.
