Commander in Chief Tours Havana Projects

FL0106184389 Havana Tele-Rebelde Network in Spanish 1700 GMT 1 Jun 89

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of Communist Party
of Cuba Central Committee and president of the Councils of State and
Ministers, has routed the various projects that are being built in Havana
by Brigades 9, 11, 12, 14 and 16 of the Blas Roca Calderio Contingent.

The tour began [words indistinct] San Francisco Bridge on the Yacabo-Cabana
Road.  This bridge was completed in 29 days by Brigade No 3 of the Blas
Roca Calderio Contingent.  This is one of the most productive brigades in
the contingent.

Later, Castro visited the Artemisa Cement Factory.  While talking with the
leadership and workers of this important production center, he was informed
about the laboral discipline and the workers' commitment to be more
efficient and save as much as possible, as well as taking advantage of
every work day as much as possible.  Also in Artemisa, our commander in
chief visited the plantain cultivation center which belongs to that
municipality's cultivation enterprise.  In their center, 1,000 quintales
are processed daily in a 10-hour period.  This is to say, 100 quintales are
processed every hour.

The collective of workers, as part of their tasks, make certain that the
tuber reaches the population with the best quality.  In another part of the
same enterprise, Castro visited the new micro-jet [preceding word in
English] irrigation system.

[Begin record] [Unidentified speaker] This system has five tubes.

[Castro] It has five tubes, and where do they go?

[Speaker] Over there in the main row.

[Castro] They go in the main row.

[Speaker] Yes, there are five tubes.

[Castro] They're plastic tubes.  We have to import the raw materials?

[Speaker] Yes sir, we do.

[Castro] Which ones did you substitute them for?

[Speaker] We substituted them for the asbestos tubes or any other tube.

[Castro] How must are you saving with this?  How much tubing does on
caballeria require?

[Speaker] It uses 1,577 meter in the drainage part, with a traditional
system.

[Castro] Well, the system is not traditional, it's new.  It is the first
one we made. How many meters do you save on this?

[Speaker] The system uses 900 meters.

[Castro] Then how much of the plastic tubing do you have left over?

[Speaker] How much plastic?

[Castro] Yes, you have 900 meters of asbestos tubing.

[Speaker] No, 900 meters of any tubing.

[Castro] Oh, of any tubing.  How did you save from 1,500 meters?

[Speaker] By replacing a single piping.

[Castro] Which one did you replace?

[Speaker] A piping that could be asbestos, plastic, or steel.  It is only a
single piping to compensate for the pressure in the entire system.

[Castro] Why do those use 1,000 something and these use 900 meters?

[Speaker] Because this one is a single piping and the other ones uses five.

[Castro] Why?  Did you make it wider or what?

[Speaker] No, we [words indistinct] compensate for the pressure, and then I
put a pressure compensator in every hose.  Then I achieve the desired
pressure by the regulator of the pressure compensator, which was built
right here in the enterprise.

[Castro] How much did you save in Cuban money?

[Speaker] We saved 27,000 pesos per caballeria.

[Castro] You saved 27,000 pesos per caballeria.  It used to be 42,000
pesos, right?

[Speaker] Yes, it used to cost 42,000 pesos.  This one costs 15,000 pesos.

[Castro] And how much is this in convertible currency?

[Speaker] I don't know.  I don't have that figure.

[Castro] You have to calculate it.  However, you've reduced the cost from
15,000 to two-thirds.  How much of those two-thirds is plastic and how much
is asbestos?

[Speaker] No, we save the plastic.

[Castro] You save the plastic?

[Speaker] There are 80 meters of plastic at the end.

[Castro] There are 80 meters of plastic at the end.  And how much plastic
did the other one use?

[Speaker] It used 746 meters of plastic.  [passage indistinct]

[Castro] So then, this reduces it to 80 meters.  Do you keep the same
amount of rubber tubing?

[Speaker] Yes, we keep the same amount.

[Castro] So this means you use the same amount of rubber tubing?

[Speaker] Yes it does.

[Castro] Now, you are sprinkling over there.  What does a man have to do to
sprinkle this side?

[Speaker] During the 4 months we have to pass that [words indistinct] to
this side so that the plantain [words indistinct] because of the winds.

[Castro] Then what do you do?

[Speaker] Then we put it in the center with an elevator we have and save
the little hose.

[Castro] By how much do you think production can be increased?  Can it be
tripled?

[Speaker] It can be tripled.

[Castro] By using traditional methods?

[Speaker] Yes, by using traditional methods.  [end recording]

The delegation then visited Brigade No. 14 which is working on the two-lane
Havana-Pinar del Rio Highway.  Afterward, Castro visited the brigade's
dining area, a facility which he compared with those of a good restaurant.

We found the members of Brigade No. 9 in the middle of their daily tasks.
The commander in chief also spoke with them.  In Bauta, Castro visited the
[words indistinct] factory which will begin to function in July.  Later, he
had a fraternal chat with the youths at this center.  Around 2040, the
commander in chief and journalists visited Brigade No 16 which is working
on the refrigerator center in the Alquizar area.

Finally, Commander in Chief Fidel Castro awarded the Cesar Escalante
Contingent with a banner.  This contingent is working on Havana's southern
floating dock.

[Begin recording] [Unidentified report] Commander, even though it is a
bit late, we would like to know what your impressions are [words
indistinct] and the work done in Havana Province.

[Castro] Well, as you can see, this tour has been going on for almost 12
hours.

[Reporter] It has been going at contingent speed.

[Castro] Exactly, it has been going on at contingent speed.  We have just
given a medium-length speech, perhaps a little more brief, on the occasion
of giving this brigade their banner.  It is the sixth brigade to receive
its banner today.  We have toured many places, I think you are keeping
count.  By my count we have visited 16 or 17 areas, or something like that.
This is because of things like visiting three areas with Brigade No 12.  We
were with them at the beginning and then later we saw where they are
building a bridge.

Anyway, we have visited over 15 places; we have discussed matters, we have
analyzed matters, and we have tried to solve certain problems, taking into
account that we always have some reserve resources.  There, where we
asphalted a little area, we had the exact equipment that was needed.  There
was also the equipment to guarantee cement production, and to guarantee the
completion of projects.  Even though we weren't [words indistinct] in
(Cuanabaco) in the canal, perhaps we will go there later and examine the
projects there and the equipment they need to finish the project by 1990.

Well, my impression is the same as yours.  I think it is the impression you
get by watching the men work as they do.  We saw many extraordinary things;
we saw the efforts made by the contingent's brigades, right here in Havana
Province. [end recording]
