FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Numerous subjects of international interest were discussed by
Commander in Chief Fidel Castro during a news conference granted in the
Brazilian capital last night. The Cuban president referred to the critical
analysis he made at the time of the Warsaw Pact's military intervention in the
CSSR in 1968 and Cuba's solidarity gestures when it happened, the Afghan
problem, and the Los Angeles Olympics.

2.  He said that, regardless of the mistakes made by socialism, we can never
side with imperialism. The Cuban leader asserted that if a socialist country
wants to build capitalism this right should be respected in the same way it
should be respected if a capitalist country wants to build socialism. He added
that in this latter case, there is no need to threaten, block, or attack the
country.

3.  Castro also analyzed the need of a new international economic order and the
integration of Latin America which is a victim of unequal trade whether it is
capitalist or socialist. Fidel praised the creative ideas and the economic
thought of Commander Ernesto Che Guvara who saw the mistake of using capitalist
theories in building socialism.

4.  Referring to the subject of Angola, the chief of the revolution said Cubans
went to that country to help a legitimately constituted government repel a
foreign attack. Fidel added that the withdrawal of South African troops from
Angola, Namibia's independence, and the internal evolution of South Africa were
achieved as a result of a firm presence there for 15 years. Over 600 people,
journalists and public, gave several ovations to our commander in chief's
remarks.
