FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Report on interview with Commander in Chief Fidel Castro by members of the
Secretariat of the Federation of Secondary School Students, FEEM, during the
Eighth FEEM Congress at the Palace of Conventions in Havana, on 7
December-recorded]

2.  [Text] Minutes before leaving the Palace of Conventions, Fidel Castro met
with members of the Secretariat of the Federation of Secondary School Students
[FEEM] to whom he commented on the Eighth FEEM Congress.

3.  [Begin recording] [Unidentified speaker] We have a team from the FEEM that
interviewed you, just as you were interviewed at the Pioneers Congress, but I
would like you to answer only one question. If you had to define the FEEM
Congress, or the Eighth FEEM Congress, with only one word, what would it be?
[words indistinct] Only one word.

4.  [Castro] One word. Optimum!

5.  [Unidentified speaker] Why optimum?

6.  [Castro] You said only one word. [laughs]

7.  [Unidentified speaker] Yes, but now we want to know why.

8.  [Castro] Why? I explained it in my speech. The people's spirit, talent,
patriotism, enthusiasm, ideas, the capacity to express themselves and
communicate their ideas in words, verses, and songs are all marvelous. I can
easily say it was optimum. I would say the congress was marvelous. It impressed
me much more than many events.

9.  Lately I have been in many different events. All these events were
impressive. I was impressed with the party congress and the labor union
meeting. I was very impressed with the Pioneers congress. But this congress was
something very noteworthy. Maybe this is why I said that when problems are
greater and greater and the situation is more difficult, the people grow and
express all their revolutionary, patriotic, and human qualities.  They express
it in a more eloquent and open manner. I believe this is the reason.

10.  You are all very dedicated, but note that I said that when the situation
returns back to normal, it will be impossible to see the reactions that we have
seen here. Just like when there is peace [words indistinct] and the country has
become a battlefield. Our youths, our students, and the delegates act as
delegates in a battlefield, as soldiers on the battlefield. We have the
satisfaction of having seen the best congresses. I do not know if there will be
another in two or three years; it is difficult, but we will have passed the
worst and will be remembering. [end recording]
