FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro considers the unity of the Cuban
people as one of the main bulwarks of the revolution and denied that
spectacular changes would take place during the upcoming party congress.  Unity
is one of our main weapons to survive as a revolutionary process vis-a-vis a
very powerful and aggressive neighbor such as the United States. This was said
by Fidel in the third part of an interview the Mexican magazine SIEMPRE is
publishing this week.

2.  The top leader of the revolution added that to admit the multiparty system
under Cuba's specific conditions is to introduce division, open the doors to
division for the benefit of the main enemy that threatens us and wants to
destroy us. He said important political changes would take place in the
congress such as the one related to the rights of religious believers to become
members of the Communist Party.

3.  Regarding the assumption that Cuba will implement a Soviet-style
perestroyka, Fidel responded to the magazine SIEMPRE: There is no reason for
Cuba to copy what they did in the Soviet Union. He added: We are two different
countries, we respect the Soviets very much and I am fond of them but the USSR
is a multiethnic state and we are not. There is no reason for us in Cuba to
rectify mistakes that were made in other places, stressed Castro. He then
asserted: There was no forced land collectivism; Stalinism, a phenomena of
abuse of power, of authority, of personality cult, and of statues, did not take
place here, was not seen in our country.

4.  Before there was ever any talk about perestroyka, we had talked about
rectification of mistakes and negative tendencies which took place in various
areas, especially in the economic one, said our Commander in Chief Fidel
Castro.
